














Unconscious Fantasy | Encyclopedia.com
 
 
 




 






 



 
 Skip to main content 
 




 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 



 






 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 



 






EXPLORE







 
EXPLORE


 
Earth and Environment


 
History


 
Literature and the Arts


 
Medicine


 
People


 
Philosophy and Religion


 
Places


 
Plants and Animals


 
Science and Technology


 
Social Sciences and the Law


 
Sports and Everyday Life


 
Additional References


 
Articles


 
Daily








 












 


 







 
 


 
 




 
Psychology
 




 
Dictionaries thesauruses pictures and press releases
 




 
Unconscious Fantasy




















 Unconscious Fantasy



 
gale

 
views 


 
updated 





 
 


 

 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 






UNCONSCIOUS FANTASY

Kleinian psychoanalysts regard the unconscious as made up of fantasies of relations with objects. These fantasies are the mental representation of instincts, and hence are thought of as primary (Isaacs, 1948).

When Freud (1900a) stressed the psychological meaning of childhood trauma, rather than its reality, he moved from a physiological way of thinking to a psychological one, thereby giving priority to the internal world. His paradigm of the psychological world was the unconscious fantasy of the three-person constellation that he named the 

Oedipus
 complex.
 Freud contrasted such internal libidinal fantasizing (the Oedipus complex) with the desexualized fantasy that serves as the basis for launching new sorts of sublimated activity in a wide domain. The role of fantasy in sublimating libido in such activities as daydreaming and aesthetic creation is quite different from the primary unconscious fantasies that provoke the conflicts of the early Oedipus complex.

Suzan Isaacs (1948) defined unconscious fantasy as the mental representation of instinct. In other words, the libido, from the outset, is an activity of mind, despite its physiological origins and functions. It takes the form of a fantasy of performing an (oral, anal, or genital) activity with an object. On the basis of such fantasies as the raw expression of instinct, the primitive mind of the infant can start to reorder itself through further primitive fantasies of projection, introjection, splitting, and denial, and in this way it may relieve itself of the experiences and terrors of primitive conflicts.

One developmental sequence starts with the unconscious fantasies of the Oedipus complex in its early stages and evolves, through fear (for example, castration anxiety), into a desexualized form: daydreaming (Freud, 1919e). Daydreaming, expressed by children in their relentless playing (Freud, 1908c), is an important activity. Classical psychoanalysis emphasizes daydreaming and its sublimatory opportunities, while Kleinian psychoanalysis emphasizes the roots of fantasy life in the unconscious.

Child analysis as developed by 
Melanie Klein
 (1955) demonstrated the workings of the unconscious in the fantasies of play. Klein developed her technique on the basis of how figures are repositioned in play. This led to a theory of how objects are positioned in relation to each other and to the child's self. Klein recognized in the details of play the child's defensiveness as well as the child's primary and conflicting impulses. The unconscious roots of impulses and defenses are expressed in relations with objects.

The nature of the very early primary fantasies was hotly debated. 
Anna Freud
 disputed 
Melanie Klein
Anna Freud
, the infant develops cognitively by establishing representations of reality and the objects in it, but these representations do not cohere into meaningful, motivating fantasies until after phases of autoeroticism and primary narcissism. 
Jean Piaget
 (1954) and Margaret Mahler et al. (1975) have plotted the emergence of representations of reality from these early objectless phases. Other infant psychologists, such as 
Daniel Stern
 (1985), tend to see the infant as possessing a sophisticated mind early on, as Klein described.

Robert D. Hinshelwood


See also:
 Archetype (analytical psychology); Controversial discussions; Isaacs-Sutherland, Susan; Imago; Logic(s); Primal, the.

Bibliography

Freud, Sigmund. (1900a). The interpretation of dreams. 
SE
, 4: 1-338; 5: 339-625.


&#x2014;

&#x2014;
. (1908c). On the sexual theories of children. 
SE
, 9: 205-226.


&#x2014;

&#x2014;
. (1919). 'A child is being beaten': A contribution to the study of the origin of sexual perversions. 
SE
, 17: 175-204.

Isaacs, Suzan. (1948). On the nature and function of phantasy. 
International Journal of Psycho-Analysis
, 
29
, 73-97.

Klein, Melanie. (1955). The psycho-analytic play technique: Its history and significance. In Klein, Melanie, Heimann, Paula, and Money-Kyrle, Roger E. (Eds.), 
New directions in psycho-analysis
. London: Tavistock Publications.

Mahler, Margaret S., Pine, Fred, and Bergman, Anni. (1975). 
The psychological birth of the human infant
. 
New York
: Basic Books.

Piaget, Jean. (1954). 
The construction of reality in the child
 (Margaret Cook, Trans.). 
New York
: Basic Books. (Original work published 1937)

Segal, Hanna. (1991). Dreams, Phantasy, and Art. London: Institute of Psycho-Analysis/Routledge.

Stern, Daniel N. (1985). 
The interpersonal world of the infant: A view from psychoanalysis and developmental psychology
. New York: Basic Books.


 
International Dictionary of Psychoanalysis
 






 

&times;






 

 
Cite this article 
 
 
Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.




 
MLA


 
Chicago


 
APA





 "
" 
International Dictionary of Psychoanalysis
. . 
Encyclopedia.com.
 8 Jan. 2025 
&lt;

https://www.encyclopedia.com

&gt;
.



International Dictionary of Psychoanalysis
. . 
Encyclopedia.com.
 (January 8, 2025). 
https://www.encyclopedia.com/psychology/dictionaries-thesauruses-pictures-and-press-releases/unconscious-fantasy




International Dictionary of Psychoanalysis
. . Retrieved January 08, 2025 from Encyclopedia.com: 
 https://www.encyclopedia.com/psychology/dictionaries-thesauruses-pictures-and-press-releases/unconscious-fantasy





 
Learn more about citation styles 

 


Citation styles

 Encyclopedia.com gives you the ability to cite reference entries and articles according to common styles from the Modern Language Association (MLA), The Chicago Manual of Style, and the American Psychological Association (APA).

 Within the “Cite this article” tool, pick a style to see how all available information looks when formatted according to that style. Then, copy and paste the text into your bibliography or works cited list.

 Because each style has its own formatting nuances that evolve over time and not all information is available for every reference entry or article, Encyclopedia.com cannot guarantee each citation it generates. Therefore, it’s best to use Encyclopedia.com citations as a starting point before checking the style against your school or publication’s requirements and the most-recent information available at these sites:


Modern Language Association


http://www.mla.org/style


The Chicago Manual of Style


http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html


American Psychological Association


http://apastyle.apa.org/



Notes:


 Most online reference entries and articles do not have page numbers. Therefore, that information is unavailable for most Encyclopedia.com content. However, the date of retrieval is often important. Refer to each style’s convention regarding the best way to format page numbers and retrieval dates.

 In addition to the MLA, Chicago, and APA styles, your school, university, publication, or institution may have its own requirements for citations. Therefore, be sure to refer to those guidelines when editing your bibliography or works cited list.









 
 

 














More From encyclopedia.com









About this article

Unconscious Fantasy

 
 Updated 

 
 
 
About 
encyclopedia.com content

 
 
 Print Article 





























You Might Also Like











NEARBY TERMS


 
 
Unconscious Concept
 


 
 
Unconscious as Infinite Sets: An Essay in Bi-Logic, The
 


 
 
unconquered
 


 
 
unconnected
 


 
 
unconformity-type uranium ore
 


 
 
Unconformities
 


 
 
unconfirmed
 


 
 
unconfined compressive strength
 


 
 
unconfined aquifer
 


 
 
unconfined
 


 
 
unconditioned or unconditional stimulus
 


 
 
unconditioned or unconditional response
 


 
 
unconditioned
 


 
 
unconditional stimulus
 


 
 
Unconditional Love
 


 
 
unconditional jump
 


 
 
unconditional
 


 
 
uncond.
 


 
 
unconcern
 


 
 
unconcealed
 


 
 
uncompromising
 


 
 
uncomprehending
 


 
 
uncomplicated
 


 
 
uncompleted
 


 
 
uncomplaining
 


 
Unconscious Fantasy


 
 
Unconscious Motivation
 


 
 
Unconscious, The
 


 
 
unconsciousness
 


 
 
unconsecrated
 


 
 
unconsenting
 


 
 
unconsidered
 


 
 
unconsolidated
 


 
 
unconstitutional
 


 
 
Unconstitutional Conditions
 


 
 
Unconstitutional Conditions (Update)
 


 
 
Unconstitutionality
 


 
 
unconstrained
 


 
 
unconstricted
 


 
 
unconsumed
 


 
 
unconsummated
 


 
 
uncontaminated
 


 
 
uncontested
 


 
 
uncontrived
 


 
 
uncontrolled
 


 
 
uncontroverted
 


 
 
unconventional
 


 
 
unconverted
 


 
 
unconvinced
 


 
 
unconvincing
 


 
 
uncooked
 











 











 




Subscribe to our newsletter

Sign up with your email address to receive news and updates.

















 

 






We respect your privacy.











Footer menu


 
Home


 
About Us


 
Help


 
Site Feedback


 
Privacy &amp; Cookie Policy


 
Terms and Conditions


 
Daily


 




© 2019 Encyclopedia.com | All rights reserved.




 

 
 


 



{"path":{"baseUrl":"\/","scriptPath":null,"pathPrefix":"","currentPath":"node\/360968","currentPathIsAdmin":false,"isFront":false,"currentLanguage":"en"},"pluralDelimiter":"\u0003","suppressDeprecationErrors":true,"user":{"uid":0,"permissionsHash":"307da934b26902b030680024e1773791a2d0824c3979c033e76f93f811d7f7eb"}}
















